---
layout: post
title: Notes on a speculative design reading group
description: Text
show_banner_image: false
banner_image: assets/images/no-image.svg
banner_image_description: no image available
tile_image: assets/images/no-image.svg
tile_image_description:
show_tile: true
show_in_menu: true
authors:
  - {
    name: "John Jung",
    email: "jej@uchicago.edu",
    affiliation: "The University of Chicago Library",
    twitter: "johnjungdotus",
    github: "johnjung",
    orcid: ,
    website: https://johnjung.us/
    }
    
---

*In 2019 Renee Albrecht-Mallinger and I started a reading group at Chicago's
community lab LATITUDE called "Design After the End of the World". We talked
about speculative design, climate change, and current events with artists,
designers and others. We have run two iterations of the group&#8212;each met
for eight weekly sessions in the early fall and each had a different group of
participants.*

*These notes are about my experience of the group and how I used it to explore
certain aspects of speculative design. This kind of design helps me better
articulate problems that are important today and will be in the future. I think
it's important to do this in the context of "the future" because people can be
incredibly invested in particular futures, and the benefits and harms of those
futures will always be distributed unevenly.*

I like Victor Papanek's quote that "there are professions more harmful than
industrial design, but only a few," and when I discovered speculative design
(and its relative, critical design) I thought it might be a way to do design
work in a more self-critical way. I don't think it necessarily does this, but I
do think it's a good way to approach it.

As a topic, climate change is humbling. It's common for designers to describe
their work as "problem solving", but in the context of really difficult
problems like climate I think they shouldn't oversell what they do. At the same
time, I feel that it would be wrong for people not to look at how their
respective fields might respond to climate. To me having an interest in design
and being concerned about climate means going back and forth between two
states&#8212;between being optimistic and pessimistic, and between thinking of
design methods as a way to solve problems and wondering if they can actually do
that. I hope this approach helps me do design in a more appropriate way,
whatever I'm working on.

I would characterize this iteration of the reading group as contemplative, with
participants listening carefully and leaving space for each other to talk and
to think about each other's comments. When it came to facilitating the actual
discussions in the group, I leaned heavily on my co-facilitator. Renee is
skilled at listening carefully, improvising in conversation, and gently nudging
people when it makes sense. In this case it was very interesting to see the
dynamics of the group develop. I hope we created an environment where people
could express their individual responses, or even figure out what those
responses might be.

Especially this year there were challenges to deal with that came from outside
of the group. For our first group we considered allowing remote access; this
year because of the pandemic, the group absolutely had to be virtual. I was
happy that people kept showing up for what could have felt like yet another
Zoom meeting. The group was a place where we could share feelings about what
was happening in the world; even if it was me expressing the uneasy
thankfulness I felt at so easily transitioning to working remote.

Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, Tony McDade, Dominique Fells, Riah Milton and
Jacob Blake were just a few of the Black people who were lost to, or suffered
from, violence in the months leading up to our group. Protests about violence
against Black people inspired a lot of white people, me included, to look more
closely at ways we're benefitting from systemic racism. In the context of the
group, I was trying to figure out how to incorporate material from people who
are Black or Indigenous; when it would be better to let someone else bring that
work up because I wouldn't do it justice; and if I did bring it up, how to do
it in a way that wasn't a kind of intellectual tourism but that was genuinely
respectful. In the context of climate change I think it's important to consider
issues like these because the negative effects of climate disproportionately
affect people who are Black or Indigenous. It's still work to figure out how to
do this, and although I don't think speculative design offers any solutions by
itself, I do think it can be another chance to work on issues like these if you
want it to be.

This year's group also took place in the weeks leading up to the 2020 election.
Processing current events like Justice Ginsburg's death became an important
part of what we did every week. With a president who was exceptionally skilled
at controlling the news cycle, the news just kept coming no matter what, and
deciding to bring things up or how to talk about them became another problem
for the group to work on. In this case I think speculative design gave us a way
to process current events, and I found that focusing on possible futures gave
me a perspective on what was happening each week that I appreciated. Figuring
out how to balance that sharper appreciation of the present against considering
possible futures that we might not expect is going to be an important next
step. On its own climate change is invisible, but we often experience it
through media like weather reports or news about storms, activisms, our energy
supply or the jobs relating to it. Paying attention to how people talk about
climate and think about it seems important, especially considering the
politically motivated sources, like thinktanks or lobbies, who create a lot of
the messaging around it. 

Climate can be an overwhelming topic. Renee and I thought about when to sit
with the uncomfortable-ness of it and when to give people a break. This year we
ran one of our sessions as a do-it-yourself film festival, featuring videos
from the design firm Superflux. Everyone dug into examples of their work (see
the Superflux website and their page on Vimeo for examples.) They selected
videos, signed up for time slots, and then we "screened" the videos together in
Zoom and talked about them. Meanwhile in a breakout room I gave tarot readings
to anyone who wanted one using Instant Archetypes, the Superflux tarot deck. It
was funâ€”which felt strange, and in the bigger picture of what we were exploring
this strangeness seems worth looking at too.

Although the problems that come up in the group may not be possible to "solve",
they are worth confronting. If we're going to have something like a Green New
Deal some of those plans for projects are going to use design methods that
people use now, and I want to be able to look at those methods critically. The
group has helped me do that. 

The future is contested territory, and for many people, an intellectual
curiosity about future possibilities is a luxury they don't have when they're
advocating for futures where they can simply exist. I'm glad the group pushed
each other to look at the future from other people's perspectives. Our
conversations gave me better ways to look at current and future problems than I
would have had without it.

*Thanks so much to my co-facilitator Renee, and to LATITUDE, and to the group
for these discussions.*
